---
title: "Jazz Nietzsche"
date: 2019-12-20T16:07:52+13:00
draft: true
tags: [philosphy, jazz, nietzsche]
---

In The Birth of Tragedy, Friedrich Nietzsche uncovers the artistic applications of the Apolline and Dionysiac drives in Attic Tragedy. He argues that the Apolline manifests itself in drama whereas the Dionysiac manifests itself in chorus, and that their seamless dialogue makes Attic Tragedy the perfect art form . The Dionysiac expression of the miserable truth is understood as pleasant Apolline images, which saves us from this wild intoxication. In this essay, I discuss the applications of these drives on jazz music using If I were a Bell by the Keith Jarrett Trio . In an immensely different art form, the Apolline and Dionysiac now manifest as musical form and improvisation. Then, I examine the relationship between these drives within the realm of jazz and how it is different from that of Attic Tragedy. Ultimately, I argue that the Apolline in jazz—instead of saving us from the dissonances of the world—encourages the exploration of the Dionysiac truth.

The Apolline and Dionysiac are natural drives that exhibit themselves in art . In the state of dreaming, one makes sense of the world through appearances, and these appearances create beautiful illusions of the world . The formation and accumulation of pleasant semblances gives rise to the principle of individuation , which Nietzsche deems as necessary for living. These images do not evoke strong emotional responses and limits the recipient to a state of dream-like calmness . He calls this the Apolline drive. Separately, the Dionysiac state, at its fullest, exerts overpowering intoxication on the recipient, who becomes ‘at one’ with the objective primordial unity . The principle of individuation breaks down while its beautiful semblances are destroyed. One’s inner urges are unbounded and thus moves one to a state of ecstasy . The interplay between the drives is balanced perfectly in Attic Tragedy, in which the Apolline features function as the on-stage drama whereas the Dionysiac features function as the chorus.

Just as Nietzsche identified the distinguishing qualities of the Apolline and Dionysiac in Attic Tragedy, so too can some qualities of these forces establish themselves in the realm of jazz music. Through the analysis of If I were a Bell by the Keith Jarrett Trio, it quickly becomes clear that the Apolline and Dionysiac drives are embodied in certain musical elements. If I were a Bell has a typical jazz form: it starts with the melody, commonly referred to as the ‘head’, then, each instrumentalist takes an improvised solo with the accompaniment of the rhythm section , and the song ends with a recall of the head. Since this analysis restricts us to the domain of the imageless, Nietzsche’s qualifications regarding the ‘imaged’ is not sensible here. My analysis of If I were a Bell focuses on the features of the limited versus the limitless, the principle of individuation versus the suspension of it, and the calm state of dreaming versus the ecstatic state of intoxication. 

Jazz improvisation captures the Dionysiac power. As Jarrett, Peacock, and DeJohnette each take their solos in If I were a Bell, they are, in their own respects, connecting with the Dionysiac drive. The soloists are removing musical boundaries, breaking the principle of individuation, and experiencing intoxication. This all naturally ascends from the spirit of improvisation. Although Nietzsche deems the Greek chorus as a manifestation of the Dionysiac, the chorus only undergoes an interpretive musical experience that lacks the occurrence of creation. This restriction comes from the scripted nature of the Greek chorus, which do not have the liberty of choosing the notes to sing. Like all music that is written down or scored, the Greek chorus contains an element of rehearsal and repetition. However, the jazz improviser is directly creating musical ideas through the instrument, which is a deeper musical experience compared to the interpretive Greek chorus. The soloist begins the exploration into their internal sound-world and strives for the moment of unity. At this moment of unity, the tensions—melodic, harmonic, and rhythm—between the improvisation and the supporting rhythm section reveal more and more of the Dionysiac. The breaking of these musical boundaries culminates when the soloist has no comprehension of their fleeting musical creations. Therefore, the soloist is elevated to another state whereby they are no longer expressing subjective musical ideations, but instead, the ideas are embodied in the soloist and they are ‘at one’ with the internal sound-world. In this state, the principle of individuation dissolves and the improviser experiences the intoxication that comes from the gradual revelation of the Dionysiac.

The Apolline drive manifests itself as the head, which supports the music with the pleasant principle of individuation, and as the form and meter, which serves as the foundational structure. The head is the opening and ending tag of the piece that encloses the improvisational passages. It is a representation that conforms to the principle of individuation, since the head of If I were a Bell is a ‘phenomenal’ aural image of an existing melody from the musical Guys and Dolls . By surrounding the improvisational madness with the jolly melody, it grounds both the musicians and the listeners with the sense of pleasant familiarity. The form (structure of the music) and meter (tempo and beat divisions) are the musical elements that provide limitations to the wilder pursuit of improvisation. While the head gives enclosure to this creative space, the form and meter combination serves as the architectural backbone of the music that make up the canvas for the exploration of the Dionysiac. Without this canvas, there would be no unity in a musician’s creation. The repetition of the form and the head reinforces the principle of individuation and stacks layers of representations to create a veil of calmness and restraint.

In jazz, the Apolline and the Dionysiac are related by amplification, whereas in Attic tragedy, these forces are related by independent reciprocation. By analyzing these drives and observing their indications in a different artistic outlet, it is natural for the Apolline-Dionysiac relationship to take different forms. In Attic Tragedy, Nietzsche argues that these forces are manifested independently, and their magnitudes are in reciprocal proportions that depend on how receptive one is of the Dionysiac . However, through the analysis of If I were a Bell, it is evident that the improviser can seek out the Dionysiac only in the domain of the Apolline, because the Apolline gives the structural support that makes this exploration into the Dionysiac possible. The Apolline allows the improviser to experiment with new sounds and rhythmic tensions, thus extending themselves beyond their own musical capacities. Throughout this extension, the improviser will inevitably make mistakes, but the form will still be maintained by the rhythm section and the meter will still act as the consistent heartbeat of the music—in other words, the Apolline will shelter the improviser from failed attempts of channeling the Dionysiac. The Apolline gives the improviser the ‘creative license’ to enter the wonderful world of intoxication, in which the improviser delivers unfathomable creations that could only be a transfiguration of the Dionysiac. The Apolline drive encourages the brave to experience the undisguised truths of the Dionysiac world. In jazz, the function of the Apolline is not so much the cure but the reassurance, which allows the courageous improvisers to explore the natural. True metaphysical solace does not come from semblances of the Dionysiac wisdom , but instead comes from the momentary embodiment of it. Jazz demands from musicians the mastery of the Western musical language so that when they improvise, they can move beyond the reorganization of musical patterns to reach a state of improvising that cannot be captured in sheet music. Striving to become ‘at one’ with one’s internal sound-world, the daring musicians in the Keith Jarrett Trio epitomizes the pursuit of truth. 

Nietzsche’s illustrations of the Apolline and Dionysiac in The Birth of Tragedy give us wonderful soteriological insights about the world. However, these anthropological drives manifest themselves as the rhythm section and soloist in the jazz music. The Apolline rhythm section amplifies the Dionysiac exploration of improvisation, which attempts to unveil the unconcealed truths in music and the world. 
